 Vol. I  Impact Of New Education Policy Among Future Generation  


ISBN  : 978-93-94004 -25-2 79
 A STUDY ON THE HISTORY OF
EDUCATION POLICIES IN INDIA

Ms. V. Poornima
Assistant Professor of Commerc e –BPS
NGM College , Pollachi

Abstract:
 India has a long and varied history of implementing educational policies at the local, state, and
national levels. Over the centuries, the country has seen many changes and developments in its
educational system, with the aim of providing access to quality  education for all its citizens. The
National Policy on Education (NPE) is a policy formulated by the Government of India to promote
and regulate education in India. The policy covers elementary education to higher education in both
rural and urban India. The first NPE was promulgated by the Government of India by Prime
Minister Indira Gandhi in 1968, the second by Prime Minister Rajiv Gandhi in 1986, and the third
by Prime Minister Narendra Modi in 2020.
Keywords:  Education, Policy, NPE, NEP.

Introduction:
 India has a long and varied history of implementing educational policies at the
local, state, and national levels. Over the centuries, the country has seen many
changes and developments in its educational system, with the aim of providing
access to quality education for all its citizens. Education is one of the fundament
rights of any individual; it helps individuals to become responsible and productive
members of the society. It fosters critical thinking, develops skills and knowledge,
and m akes a person more responsible towards the society as they contribute to the
economy of the nation and participate fully in civic life. It plays a very crucial role in
promoting personal and social development. It helps to build strong communities
and a st rong democracy, and it is essential for the ongoing and development of our
world.

History o f Education Policies i n India :
 The National Policy on Education (NPE) is a policy formulated by the
Government of India to promote and regulate education in India. The policy covers
elementary education to higher education in both rural and urban India. The first
NPE was promulgated by the Government of India by Prime Minister Indira Gandhi
in 1968, the second by Prime Minister Rajiv Gandhi in 1986, and the third by Prime
Minister Narendra Modi in 2020.
 Since the country's independence in 1947, the Indian government sponsored a
variety  of programmes to address the problems of illiteracy in both rural and urban
Vol. I  Impact Of New Education Policy Among Future Generation


ISBN  : 978-93-94004 -25-2 80
 India. Maulana Abul Kalam Azad, India's first Minister of Education, envisaged
strong central government control over education throughout the country, with a
uniform educational system. The Union government established the University
Education Commission (1948 –1949), the Secondary Education Commission (1952 –
1953), University Grants Commission and the Kothari Commission (1964 –66) to
develop proposals to modernise India's education system. The Resolution on
Scientific Policy was adopted by the government of Jawaharlal Nehru, India's first
Prime Minister. The Nehru government sponsored the development of high -quality
scientific education institutions such as the Indian Institutes of T echnology. In 1961,
the Union government formed the National Council of Educational Research and
Training (NCERT) as an autonomous organisation that would advise both the Union
and state governments on formulating and implementing education policies.



1. National Policy o n Education i n 1968
 Based on the report and recommendations of the Kothari Commission (1964 –
1966), the government headed by Prime Minister Indira Gandhi announced the first
National Policy on Education in 1968, which called for a "radica l restructuring" and
proposed equal educational opportunities in order to achieve national integration
and greater cultural and economic development. The policy called for fulfilling
compulsory education for all children up to the age of 14, as stipulated by the
Constitution of India and specialized training and qualification of teachers. The
policy called for a focus on the learning of regional languages, outlining the "three
language formula" to be implemented in secondary education - the instruction of t he
English language, the official language of the state where the school was based, and
Hindi. Language education was seen as essential to reduce the gulf between the
intelligentsia and the masses. Although the decision to adopt Hindi as the national

Vol. I  Impact Of New Education Policy Among Future Generation


ISBN  : 978-93-94004 -25-2 81
 langu age had proven controversial, the policy called for the use and learning of
Hindi to be encouraged uniformly to promote a common language for all Indians.
The policy also encouraged the teaching of the ancient Sanskrit language, which was
considered an ess ential part of India's culture and heritage. The NPE of 1968 called
for education spending to increase to six percent of the national income. As of 2013,
the NPE 1968 has moved location on the national website.

2. New National Policy o n Education 1986
 In 1986, the government led by  Rajiv Gandhi  introduced a new National Policy
on Education.  The new policy called for "special emphasis on the removal of
disparities and to equalise edu cational opportunity," especially for Indian
women,  Scheduled Tribes  (ST) and the  Scheduled Ca ste (SC) communities.  To
achieve such a social integration, the policy called for expanding scholarships, adult
education, recruiting more teachers from the SCs, incentives for poor families to
send their children to school regularly, development of new in stitutions and
providing housing and services.  The NPE called for a "child -centred approach" in
primary education, and launched "Operation Blackboard" to improve primary
schools nationwide. The policy expanded the  open university  system with the  Indira
Gandhi National Open University , which had been cre ated in 1985.  The policy also
called for the creation of the "rural university" model, based on the philosophy
of Mahatma Gandhi , to promote economic and social development at t he grassroots
level in rural India.[7] 1986 education policy expected to spent 6% of GDP on
education.

3. National Policy o n Education (Modification) 1992
 The 1986 National Policy on Education was modified in 1992 by the  P. V.
Narasimha Rao  government.  In 2005, Former Prime Minister  Manmohan
Singh  adopted a new policy based on the "Common Minimum Programme" of
his United Progressive Alliance  (UPA) government.  Programme of Action (PoA)
1992, under the National Policy on Education (NPE), 1986 envisaged to conduct of a
common entrance examination on all India basis for admission to professional and
technical programmes in the country. For admission to Engineering and
Architecture/Planning programmes, Government of India vide Resolution dated 18
October 2001 has laid down a Three – Exam Scheme (JEE and AIEEE at the National
Level and the State Level Engineering Entrance Examinations (SLEEE) for State
Level Institutions – with an option to join AIEEE). This takes care of varying
admission standards in these programmes and helps in maintenance of professional
standards. This also solves problems of overlaps and reduces physical, mental and
financial burd en on students and their parents due to multiplicity of entrance
examinations.
Vol. I  Impact Of New Education Policy Among Future Generation


ISBN  : 978-93-94004 -25-2 82
 4. National Education Policy 2020 (Present)
 In 2019, the then Ministry of Human Resource Development and now the
Ministry of Education released a Draft New Education Policy 2019, which was
followed by a number of public consultations. It discusses reducing curriculum
content to enhance essential learning, critical thinking and more holistic experiential,
discussion -based and analysis -based learning.  It also talks about a revision o f the
curriculum and pedagogical structure from a 10+2 system to a 5+3+3+4 system
design in an effort to optimise learning for students based on cognitive development
of children. Research Methodology has been added in the last year of graduation
course an d student will have the choice to leave the course and receive the
certificate/ degree according to that.On 29 July 2020, the cabinet approved a new
National Education Policy with an aim to introduce several changes to the existing
Indian education system, which will be introduced in India till 2026.

Conclusion:
 The National Education Policy is a comprehensive set of guidelines and
recommendations for the Indian education system. It aims to make education more
inclusive, relevant, and engaging for all students, and to foster the development of
critical thinking and problem -solving skills. By implementing these
recommendations, the NEP aims to ensure that all students have the opportunity to
receive a high -quality education and reach their full potential . In conclusion, the
New Education Policy represents a major shift in the way education is delivered in
India, and it has the potential to bring significant benefits to the education system.
Though it has faced a lot of criticism from students as well as e ducators and learners
who are in the mid of the course which will no longer be considered a degree (like
an M.Phil).   However, its success will depend on effective implementation and
adequate resources, and it will require continued effort and commitment f rom the
government, edu cators, and the wider community .